
assert - Intro
In Python, the assert statement is a debugging aid that is used to check whether a given condition is true or false, and it raises an AssertionError exception if the condition is false. The assert statement is typically used as a debugging tool during development to catch and diagnose issues in your code. Here's a description of the assert statement in Python:

Syntax:

The basic syntax of the assert statement is as follows: assert expression[, message]

expression is the condition that you want to check. If it evaluates to False, Python raises an AssertionError exception.

message (optional) is an additional message that you can provide to describe the assertion. This message is displayed when the assertion fails and can help you identify the problem.

Usage:

The primary use of the assert statement is to perform sanity checks and verify assumptions in your code. It's often used to validate that variables have expected values, preconditions are met, or that certain conditions are true during program execution.

When to Use assert:

assert statements are typically used in non-production code (e.g., during development and testing) to catch errors early in the development process. It's not intended for handling runtime errors in production code.

The assert statements can be disabled globally using the -O (optimize) command-line switch when running Python. In optimized mode, assert statements are ignored, so they won't incur any runtime overhead in production code.

Assertions with Debugging:

When you encounter an AssertionError, it provides valuable information about the location in your code where the assertion failed and the message you provided. This helps you pinpoint and fix issues quickly during development.

Documentation and Comments:

While assert statements can serve as a form of documentation for the expected behavior of your code, it's generally better to use comments or docstrings to provide clear and detailed explanations of your code's assumptions and expectations.



Example:

def divide(a, b):
    assert b != 0, "Division by zero is not allowed"
    return a / b
 
result = divide(10, 2)  # No assertion error
result = divide(10, 0)  # Raises AssertionError with the message


In this example, the assert statement checks whether the denominator b is not equal to zero before performing the division. If b is zero, an AssertionError is raised with the specified message.



Remember that assert statements should not be used for error handling or validation in production code, as they can be disabled, and unexpected assertion failures can lead to unpredictable behavior. In production code, use proper error handling techniques like try and except for handling exceptional cases.